In the course we have seen that there are four phases in the development of the product or
business model that we have called product solution feed, which are the first experiments,
product market feed, which is when you already have an MVP and you have validated that it generates a certain value,
that there are clients who pay for it, etc. Then you validate the growth channels and the last
phase would be the expansion phase, international growth or whatever, there are many companies that do not arrive.
To move forward, in many cases, financing is needed, it is necessary that they help you with funds,
with foreign funds and I would like you to explain to us how the phases are from the perspective of
the development of the product and how they are from the perspective of financing, what they are called, who
you have to resort to in each phase, etc. Well, the nomenclatures of the phases vary a lot,
that is, it is not something that is established, as well as in the United States the names of the phases are very clear
and they correspond to certain quantities, in Spain, probably due to the
immaturity of the ecosystem, we still call a round of 500,000 euros or a round of 100 million euros.
So the names that we are going to see are all orientative, but as you said, being very
associated with the stages of growth, of product development, it is what will serve as a guide.
The first stage is the phase in which it is called seed phase or seed capital, which is in the one
related to the product in which we are developing that product, we are first checking that
product, because we are able to develop it and that it solves a problem. This is when
someone has an idea, the first steps, we call it, from the product, from the business,
it is product solution feed, from the point of view of financing, it is seed.
Exactly, it would be seed capital or seed financing. The ideal in this case is to do it with our own resources,
that is, the first thing we have to see is what is our minimum viable product and how long
it will take or how much money we will need to develop it and this will depend on the type of
business model we want to do, because obviously if we are doing a more technological project
or something of blockchain, artificial intelligence that needs a longer development, the
development periods of this MVP will be longer, but the normal or ideal would be that we could
develop a minimum viable product with our own resources and even in our free time.
The recommendation here is when, because this is also a situation in which many people are seen,
when we talk about the later stages, they are already larger companies, more professionalized,
that have more help, but this has happened to many people, they have an idea, they are working
on a foreign account, for example, and I know that there are people who seem to wait for the
business angel to come or for the fund to come and what they have is an idea in a powerpoint,
so the recommendation that we usually give is the first steps as you said, give them the
first stage of financing that you have called it, do it with your money or with money from very close people
because the risk is so high that a business angel is not going to trust you that you are
working elsewhere with a powerpoint. Just, that is, five years ago, still 5, 6, 7 years ago, it
was still viable because the volume of projects was much less, getting financing or
capital seed only with a powerpoint, but today with the number of people who are
doing very well done things, as you well commented, it is a matter of risk and the business
angels or the most professional investors prefer to enter a little more advanced stages,
especially because if you do not trust your idea enough how to leave your job or
dedicate your time to it, dedicate your money to it, you are asking them to risk their money in
something in which you do not trust enough. Yes, because you have not shown anything yet,
you have not shown anything, as you said, five years ago or ten years ago, perhaps in a different ecosystem
in which you still have a good idea, you made a powerpoint, you went to the market and convinced
someone, but today, as you have said sometime, quoting Kaviedes, you were talking about the first 10
invoices, if you are able to demonstrate something, if you have been able to issue 10 invoices and 10
customers have been paid, the risk perception by a potential investor is much lower than if
what we have is a piece of paper saying four ideas that, as we have seen in other occasions,
in most cases the four ideas never end up becoming a business model.
Also at this stage, at the stage in which you have to be 100% focused on developing
your minimum viable product, the focus is fundamental, so if I dedicate part of my attention
or part of my focus to the search for capital, I will be distracting myself from the important thing
and what I have to do at that moment, which is to validate that the problem that I have detected
exists and that the solution that has occurred to me solves it. Great, so first phase,
from the point of view of the business, you have to do just what you have said and from the
point of view of financing, our recommendation is to do it with your own resources, with your money
or with the Friends, Families and Pools, but carefully. If you are doing a blockchain or
artificial intelligence move or even something else in the world of health or scientific research
and that development of that MVP is something a little longer, it may make sense to look for
an incubator or even a business angel specialized in that vertical that, in addition to money,
can provide you with know-how, contacts, can open doors, that is, more than money in this phase,
the important thing is people who provide you with their experience or provide you with their network of contacts.
Okay, but that's only if they are projects with a very high potential, if you also know how to sell well, etc.
In general, in almost all projects, what are the first steps with your...
If it is not a technologically hyper complicated project or put in the most scientific world of research,
you should be able to do it in your free time with your own resources.
That is, and do not be blocked by waiting for someone to come to solve things for you.
That's it. Okay, let's move on to the next phase, in which you have taken the first steps,
the first 10 invoices, you already have a product, you have something that you can demonstrate,
and who do you turn to at that moment?
Well, this phase is usually called the early stage phase, and as you said, we already have an MVP,
we already have a minimum viable product, we already have some first customers,
and we are starting to generate the first metrics.
With this, it makes sense and we already have more possibilities to go out looking for professional financing,
which in this case would be, we go back to accelerators, we go back to incubators,
we go back to the business angels, that the business angels, we remember that we had spoken that in addition to money,
as they are usually a profile of entrepreneurs who have already been successful and have sold their companies,
they can contribute more than money, they can also contribute know-how and their network of contacts,
and in this phase we can even go to capital funds, venture capital,
but remember that in this phase the objective is to get the first customers and measure everything to the satiety,
that is, here I need to have metrics, which are metrics that are going to help me,
as we will see in later classes, to get that money,
that is, these metrics are going to help me to demonstrate that this minimum viable product that I have developed
is capable of getting customers and the customers I get are so happy that they repeat and recommend it.
Okay, so in this second phase, which you have called the early stage,
although there are people like you, you have said this is not black and white and it can be denominated in different ways,
in the United States they call it with other terminologies sometimes, etc.,
but what is very important to understand is, and you will explain the subsequent phases later,
as you demonstrate things, to explain it in a simple way, you validate things,
you decrease the risk, the valuation of the company increases and you have to go,
and you can access another investor profile, and in the early stage phase you have told us that it is easier to start with Omniscience Angel,
you have told us about some venture capital, right?
Exactly, although in phases, then within venture capital, there are venture capital that are more focused on these previous phases,
in fact in Spain, most venture capital, in this phase, the normal thing, it also depends on the type of project,
but it would be to raise between 150,000 and 250,000 euros, which would ideally be to allocate them to validate those capture channels.
Once we have a product, the objective of this phase is to get all the metrics, we have to know,
as we talked about in the class of metrics, how much it costs me to get a client, when I am going to recover the investment,
how much I am going to multiply it, and for that I need to have money to do tests, to test different capture channels.
So, in Spain, this average ticket of 150,000, 200,000, 250,000 euros, you can find venture capital funds that provide it.
The thing gets a little more complicated when we need higher tickets in later phases,
and speaking of millions of euros, the financing funds we have in Spain are a little short.
Indeed, another thing to take into account is that, as this is a process,
and it is a process that is not the same for all companies, not in all places,
but it is a process in which there are certain things that must be taken into account,
and it is that, as I said, you are validating things, you are demonstrating things, the risk perceived by the market is increasingly lower,
because you are demonstrating it, your company is worth more, and the rounds are getting bigger and bigger.
That is, the first investment, as you said, you put it, well, you put the money you can, usually, right?
The one they leave you.
Bernardo Hernandez told us that he recommended for a year and a half, but hey, you still have it, you still have less money,
that is, for less time, sorry. Early stage, the next round, you were already talking about larger quantities,
you were talking about 150,000, well, maybe there are models that need 500,000, I don't know,
but what you have to take into account is that more and more.
Exactly.
And the next phase, which is the phase of growth,
which now you explain to us what type of investor you can access,
and the next one, which would be to create a global company, more and more money.
Right.
In the early phase, you can validate with 100, 200, 500,000 euros,
well, hey, let's validate that Facebook works as a capture channel,
you can do little projects with 2,000, 3,000 euros,
but if what I have to validate is that my product can also be bought in Latin America,
you don't validate that with 2,000 euros, we are already talking about larger quantities.
We are already talking about the next phase, perhaps, in the development of the product,
which would be to validate.
Let's make a case, we have already validated that we have a product that we like,
and you already know how much it costs you to capture on Facebook,
you already know how much you get, more or less, because you have certain metrics,
and now what you want, as you said, is to grow in Latin America,
or grow in the United States, we are in the phase that we have to validate the expansion,
we have to validate that what we have, we have shown here that it is a good business,
that anyone can do it, because we have metrics and because we can show it to anyone,
and now we have to validate the expansion, who do we resort to, and why do you matter?
Before that expansion, we have the growth phase,
that in this growth phase, what we have to do is optimize these channels,
once we have verified that, hey, this product sells very well on Instagram,
but through Facebook, it works regularly for us,
and the influencers work very well for us, for example,
there what we need is gasoline to show that we are able to scale it,
because there is a term that is the early adopters,
then in many models it happens that the first 100, 150, 200 users are relatively easy to achieve,
but there comes a point when I start to put money in,
and the more money I start to put in, suddenly my acquisition costs start to rise,
especially when they are very visionary products, or very new, or we are creating a market,
then this is something that also usually creates fear and insecurity for investors,
because they have seen it many times,
then before letting you go to wider expansions or opening new verticals,
they want to see what happens with your acquisition cost when you start to put a lot more money in marketing.
In this phase, in this growth phase, it begins to make sense, for example,
this that we talked about in previous classes, to make a media for equity,
there are times when I make media for equity agreements before having validated the capture channels,
before having validated that my product is really an attractive product,
that it is attractive for more than those 100, 150, 200 people who are our early adopters,
and that it allows me to grow over time,
so when we see, we are satisfied that we can start to climb,
here the business angels no longer stop being able to enter,
because when I have to put money in seriously and overcome that barrier of being early adopters,
we are already talking about investments of millions of euros,
and here we would go to what in Spain we call a series A,
which are already financing rounds, in which we are already talking about millions of euros,
in which it is already almost exclusive territory of venture capital,
and in which it may make sense to make a media for equity.
Indeed, and it is a very interesting topic, the one you have commented,
there are times when you go to the market and at the beginning you sell,
it is like you enter with a knife, because there is a percentage of people in society
that your proposal fits them very well, but you don't know that knife how far it will go,
you don't know what your crystal ceiling is, because maybe there are four crazy people,
and then you dimension the whole company,
thinking that instead of four crazy people there are four million crazy people and there are only four,
then you receive a lot of money, you make a media for equity, whatever it is,
and it is that you do not sell more than four because your product does not like more people,
and that is why you said that investors are certain risk, that is, they are certain fear.
Exactly, and also the good thing is that as an ecosystem,
Spain is also advancing a lot and we are all learning from different generations of entrepreneurs,
so once this phase is over, we would move on to the expansion phase,
in the expansion phase, which is one of the most critical phases,
because here we have already validated that we have a product,
we have validated the problem that we identified at the beginning,
we have validated that the product that we have designed solves it,
we have validated that we are able to capture clients for this product
and we have validated that this knife reaches the bottom,
that is, not only that we are able to go beyond those four crazy people,
once we have this validated, it is when we say,
hey, we are going to move on to other countries,
we are going to expand either in markets or vertically,
we are doing something in the world of animals, for example,
because now we are moving on to the world of babies, which could be an example.
In these phases, here we already talk about hundreds of millions or tens of millions of investments,
and I want to open a whole continent and I want to do it well
and I want to be able to compete with the competitors
or with the people who are already doing the same in that market,
because I need more money.
Here comes a very interesting figure when it comes to investment,
which are the industrial partners.
The way startups work, this agile way of validating, iterating,
testing things, failing quickly,
makes a lot of sense in these initial phases,
but when we get bigger and start opening countries,
aligning with an industrial partner, with a bigger brother in our sector,
can make sense because in addition to money, which obviously is good for us,
it can give us know-how, open doors to markets
that, due to our initial size, we have closed.
I think the explanation is perfect.
What I want to add is that very few people reach this phase.
Very few.
How many companies are there?
Well, in the United States there are more,
but how many companies in the rest of the world are there that raise rounds?
We are talking about 50 million, which is very few.
They count with their fingers.
It can be one in every thousand, calmly.
Yes, they count with their fingers.
We do a wrap-up of the phases and, above all, who you go to.
You start, the first steps, you call them the seed phase.
In the seed phase, we ideally do it with our own resources,
doing what we called bootstrapping in previous classes,
friends, families and full,
and only and exclusively in the case that developing our MVP
is very long or very expensive because the technology is very specific,
we would go to an incubator or a business angel.
Perfect.
Next phase, we have already shown, we have an MVP that starts to pull
and we start to have metrics,
but we need some money to validate it.
Exactly.
In this phase, in which we are validating our capture channels
and we are validating the engagement that we generate with our users,
here it can make sense to go to business angels or venture capital,
but venture capital specialized in the investment of very early phases.
That's it.
Yes, because, as you said, there are venture capital that are willing to take more risks
and others that enter later phases.
Next phase, let's say we are trying to validate the expansion
or optimize the channels and so on.
In the growth phase, this is when we need the money almost by millions
because we are validating that we are capable of these channels
that we have already shown that work,
pass that barrier of those four crazy ones that we mentioned
and here we have to go to a media for equity
or a venture capital in higher phases.
Because we are already talking about millions.
Yes, we are already talking about millions or even tens of millions.
And then there is the last one, which you have called expansion,
when you have 40, 30, 50 million, whatever,
which is enough money to have a global company.
Exactly, a global company.
And here, in addition to venture capital,
that in Spain there are few venture capital that can reach these quantities,
we would have to go to venture capital and international,
enter the industrial partners.